---
layout: single
title: "Glossary, or: Quill"
permalink: /glossary/
sidebar:
    nav: dmc
---
Choosing a Writing Support
==========================

Skins and scraps

For much of the Middle Ages dead cows were the main ingredient for
books. What was frolicking in the meadow one month, may have been a page
in a Bible the next. The skin of animals - calfs, goats, sheep - was
turned into parchment, which was subsequently cut into sheets. Parchment
was introduced in late Antiquity, when the codex, the book made of
double leaves, was born and started to replace the papyrus scroll. In
the 12th century another material appeared in Europe: paper.

Imported from Arabic culture, it was first exclusively used for
documentary purposes, such as account books and letters. In a remarkable
shift of scribal practices, in the fourteenth century scribes all over
Europe started to use paper for manuscripts. Conservative scribes, such
as monks, ignored the new material, while others, especially those who
wanted to economize, embraced it. Paper and parchment were used for all
sorts of manuscripts, from chunky volumes to small folded books.

## Wax Tablet

Tablet

This clever device from Antiquity provided the user with a layer of wax
on a wooden frame to capture his thoughts. With a little pressure from
the stylus, words were etched into the wax. They could easily be wiped
away again, so the device could be reused. A little pressure from the
stylus would create ideas, which could subsequently be wiped again. The
classroom was a place where wax tablets were used on a daily basis, at
least up until the fourteenth century.

## Parchment

Dead cows

What was once a calf, sheep or goat frolicking grazing in the meadow,
may now be a page in a manuscript. That is not a bad way to go. It is a
strange experience leafing through a medieval book, knowing that you are
touching an animal that stopped breathing over 500 years ago. Sometimes
the page shows the tiny dots where the hairs once grew. Up to c. 1300
books in Europe were almost exclusively made from animal skin. Then
scribes started to use paper, tempted as they were by the lower cost of
the material.

However, parchment was regarded as the more durable of the two: 'If you
want a real book, use parchment' was the sentiment in the streets,
which is why some scribes, particularly monks, were hesitant to use
paper as default material. When in c. 1450 the printing press arrived,
animal skin quickly became obsolete, although the trend was already set
half a century earlier.

## High Quality Parchment

Perfect skin

Up to around 1300, most books in Europe were made from animal skin -
parchment. The quality of these sheets varied considerably. Like people
today, not all medieval creatures had perfect skin. Some cows loved to
rub against trees and others were particularly prone to insect bites. We
can still see these defects on the medieval page today, which appear as
tiny holes, gaps or dark patches.

The quality of the page also had a lot to do with preparation. A scribe
producing a book for his own library may be less attentive than one that
worked in a monastic community. The best sheets have a deep-white color,
with a hint of yellow. They feel like velvet and make a slight rustling
sound when you turn the page - suspenseful whispers that teased the
reader.

## Damaged Parchment

Damaged goods

'Be careful what you buy in the city of Erfurt: they sell you animals
skins to which letters will not stick.' This complaint of a medieval
scribe shows that these craftsmen were well aware of the varying quality
of animal skins, which they used as the basis for their books. However,
calves, sheep or goats that had gruntingly given up their livelihood and
skin for the sake of medieval readers were not always to blame.

The most common imperfections are holes produced by the knife of the
parchment maker. When he cleaned the skin with his knife, it was
strapped on a wooden frame: tight like a drum a small puncture easily
became a gaping hole. The art of preparing animal skin was to apply just
the right amount of pressure. Readers did not seem to mind the holes too
much and scribes usually just wrote around them, or they repaired them.

## Parchment Offcuts

Yellow sticky note

When the scribe cut sheets out of the animal hide, he would normally use
the best part of the skin - what may be called the 'prime cut'. This
meant staying clear of the very edge of the skin because these areas
were very thin and translucent, and deemed unsuitable for books. The
scribe therefore cut a rim of parchment from the edge of the skin. It
usually came off in tiny bits and pieces, which he called 'schedulae' - strips.

These odds and ends were thrown in the bin. Sometimes they were taken
out to be used as scraps, for example for taking notes in the classroom.
They also served as smaller pages inserted into existing manuscripts.
Tipped into the quire these tiny pages supplemented the text or added
notes, like yellow sticky notes.

## Parchment Palimpsest

Stowaway

What to do when you run out of parchment as a medieval scribe? You can
look around for something else to write on, such as left-over parchment
strips in the bin (schedulae), or use paper if it is available.
Alternatively, you can take a book that is no longer used from your
monastery's library and scrape the text off its pages. You then simply
reapply text of your own. Such recycling resulted in a 'palimpsest',
which held a removed 'lower text' and a newer 'upper text'.

The ink of the reapplied text often does not stick to the page very
well. Moreover, the older reading often shines through. Especially
important are palimpsests from the earlier Middle Ages, because
underneath this old text an even older work is buried, like a stowaway.
With digital photography the lower text can sometimes be made visible
again, which makes studying these books like digging for treasure.

## Paper

The cheaper alternative

Paper became an alternative to parchment in the later Middle Ages. The
new material was introduced into Europe in the late twelfth century.
Initially imported from the Arabic world by merchants, from the second
half of the twelfth century paper was also produced in European mills,
first in Italy and Spain, then in France, and finally in England and
Germanic countries. At first, the new material was exclusively used in
administration.

It was not until the late thirteenth century, however, that paper was
introduced in book production, where it became a more affordable (and
sometimes more plentiful) alternative to parchment. Although paper made
the production of manuscripts somewhat cheaper, the objects still
remained expensive: they were a luxury good for people with less money.
The watermark that is usually found in a paper sheet helps the book
historian date and localize the paper batch used for a manuscript.

## Watermark


If you look carefully at a medieval page that is made of paper, you
notice a shape hidden inside, such as the head of an ox, a bell, or a
jester. These little 'drawings' that show themselves when you hold a
light behind the page are watermarks. They are a byproduct of the
production process of paper. The papermaker used a kind of screen to
scoop up the mush of cloth from which paper was made.

The water would be pushed through a roster or sift at the bottom of the
screen, while the cloth fibers that remained behind formed the pulpy
beginning of a page. These screens were fitted with drawings made from
thin metal strings. Each papermaker had his own picture with which he
'branded' his product. Because the screen was replaced every few years,
these watermarks now form a great tool for dating medieval paper
manuscripts.

Making Quires and Sheets
========================

Cuddly quires

While the medieval book was made out of sheets, it is the quire that is
the object's building block. A quire is a small package of folded
sheets (bifolia or double-leaves) made of parchment, paper or off-cuts.
A medieval book consisted of twenty or more quires, which were held
together by a binding. How many bifolia or singletons a scribe would use
for a quire depended on his geographical location, among other things.

Copyists in England often opted for six double-leaves, while their
continental counterparts almost never did: they favored four. Some
late-medieval manuscripts, especially Paris Bibles contained quires with
a very high number of bifolia, eighteen or even more. Thick quires are
also found up in manuscripts made by chancery clerks, such as account
books. When you look at the top or bottom of a manuscript you can easily
spot the individual quires, all cuddled up inside the binding.

## Bifolium

Bonding sheets

Quires are usually made from bifolia (singular: bifolium) or double
sheets of parchment or paper. To create a bifolium, a sheet is folded in
half (each half is called a 'folium', which consists of two 'pages',
i.e. the front and back of the folium). If the quire is the building
block of the medieval book, the bifolium is what defines the quire:
four, five or six of them were bundled up and subsequently filled with
text.

Looking closely at the binding of the book, each bifolium appears to
embrace its neighbor, bonding together to produce a strong quire. Before
roughly 1200, bifolia were usually cut from processed animal skins, each
of which usually supplied one to three double sheets. They were either
cut from the skin or the skin was simply folded, either once (folio),
twice (quarto), or three times (octavo). Paper double sheets were
exclusively produced by folding the full sheet.

## Catchwords and Signatures

Location, location

As with our modern books, medieval manuscripts consist of quires: small
packages of folded leaves. The scribe would copy the text onto the pages
of the quire, which would later be bound together to form the completed
manuscript. To make sure that each finished quire ended up in the
correct order, the scribe often wrote the first words of the next quire
in the lower margin of the last page he copied.

These are called 'catchwords'.

If the catchword at the end of the quire matched the first word on the
next quire, then they were in the correct sequence. Sometimes, to
further help binders put the quires in the right order, scribes would
number them. In the later Middle Ages, further organization was added to
the page by also numbering the individual bifolia, so as to keep track
of their specific location within the quire. In spite of all this
emphasis on location, from time to time binders still jumbled up the
sequence.

## Quire

Building blocks

Quires, which were produced by bundling together a number of bifolia,
form the building blocks of the manuscript. How many bifolia the scribe
bundled together often depended on his or her location. Book producers
in England, for example, are known to have regularly produced quires of
six bifolia, while scribes on the Continent typically preferred quires
of four bifolia. Some quires are irregular. An extra folium could be
added (called a singleton) or a leaf could be cut out.

Such instances of irregularity are of great interest to book historians,
because they may suggest that the original composition was expanded by
the scribe (for which an extra folium was needed) or because a blank
folium was removed at a later stage (it came in handy for taking notes).
Scribes often produced the quires themselves, but it also appears that
they used prefabricated quires on occasion.

Preparing the Page
==================

Get set!

Before a single word flowed from his pen, the scribe needed to prepare
the page. Whether he had opted for a writing supported material, such as
parchment or paper, the sheets were completely blank. He first needed to
think about a sensible layout, carefully considering his options. Did
the text he was about to copy carry certain conventions? Was it for
example a book that was to contain glosses, or was it made for portable
use? The design materialized when the scribe started to punch holes in
the sheet (pricking) and draw lines between pairs of holes (ruling).
Every single word on the page was written on such a line, which was
drawn with either pencil or ink, or with a pointy object. Preparing the
page was a labor-intensive process, especially when the scribe had opted
for a complex layout, with multiple columns and glosses. It was
important to get it right, however, as a messy layout would produce a
messy book.

## Layout


Puzzle

Before a scribe could begin to fill the quires with text, the layout of
the page needed to be designed and prepared by means of pricking and
ruling. How a page was designed depended on a variety of factors,
including the number of required text columns, the space left blank for
decoration, and the presence of marginal glosses and running titles. The
most basic layout consisted of a single column of text. They are
frequently encountered in Books of Hours, because these are commonly
smaller books, which facilitated portability. Bigger books of two or
more columns often required more work in the design stage, especially if
that book also featured a marginal commentary. Particularly challenging
were those cases where the commentary was of unequal length, as seen
here. This meant that the scribe had to design each page separately.
Piecing together the segments of main text and commentary was like
solving a puzzle.

## Pricking and Ruling


Cobweb

Unlike our notebooks today, medieval paper and parchment sheets did not
come with ruled lines when you purchased them. A medieval page consisted
of both horizontal and vertical ruling. To add these guiding lines to
the blank page, the scribe would prick tiny holes in the outer margins,
as well as in the upper and lower ones. Lines were then drawn between
these holes, usually with the help of a ruler: horizontal lines to guide
the space between each line of text, and vertical lines to confine the
left and right side of the textblock.

Until the early twelfth century the ruling was done by pressing down on
the parchment with a sharp object, producing a 'gutter' that would
guide the scribe's pen (called 'dry point'). This type of ruling was
replaced by drawing lines with a pencil or pen, which left more visible
traces on the surface of the page (called 'plummet'). If a layout was
very complex, the ruling pattern may appear as a cobweb of horizontal
and vertical lines.

Copying the Text
================

Words, words, words

Parchment makers prepared skins, scribes cut their pens and filled their
ink pots, and binders packed their workshops with leather and wood. All
these activities would be in vane were it not for the single event that
sparked them: copying words. Writing a medieval text with a quill is
hard work. 'The fingers write, but the whole body suffers' says a
medieval saying. The pen could only move downwards because of how the
nib was cut, which meant that letters had to be broken up into multiple
pen strokes. This made writing a very slow process: a Bible could take a
year to complete. A scribe's handwriting -- script - can tell us where
and when he was trained to write. Script tells us these things because
the shape of letters was constantly changing. Script is thus an
important historical tool that helps to place stories and information
into the proper cultural-historical setting.

## Abbreviation


Abbrev.

From 'app' to 'math': abbreviating words is human. Why write words
in full if a shorter version will do? Medieval scribes agreed. The
manuscripts they made are usually packed with abbreviations. Perhaps the
most common is the macron: a line above a letter that represents the
letter n or m.

Another popular abbreviation mark is the 7-shaped symbol for 'et'
(and). The number and kinds of abbreviations varied. Manuscripts with
liturgical texts usually have few abbreviations, while they are abundant
in those filled with university texts, such as Aristotle. Abbreviations
may also be problematic. They are only useful, after all, if the reader
can understand them.

## Script


Between the lines

Medieval script - the handwriting of the scribe - is the material
representation of a text. An author may have composed the text,
producing the original thought, poem or story, but it was often the
scribe who put these words on the page. Much rides on how he did this.
If he was inexperienced, it may be difficult to decipher his writing. If
he was sloppy, the wrong words may appear on the page, or the right ones
in the wrong order.

The handwriting of scribes varied considerably. Not only did individual
scribes vary their individual letter forms, as we still do today, but
style of medieval script often depended on when and where it was
written. This makes script extremely useful for book historians: the
producer of a manuscript may tell us, between the lines, where and when
he made the book. My maker is from Germany, a letter or abbreviation may
for example say. From time to time scribes would even say so explicitly,
in a colophon at the end of the book.

## Carolingian Script


The unifier

Caroline Minuscule is the primary script of the early Middle Ages.
Created in the late eighth century, it became the main book script in
the empire of Charlemagne (d. 814). It is an elegant script with a
particularly round and spacious appearance Because Charlemagne had
conquered a vast amount of territory during his reign, he found himself
with an empire of many cultures, each with its own manner of writing.

A cohesive and unifying script was needed if his administration was to
function properly. Caroline Minuscule looks familiar to our modern eyes
because producers of typeface working for early Italian printers used it
as a model. In fact, the ubiquitous default font 'Times New Roman' on
our computers is also based on Caroline Minuscule.

## Cursive Script


Migration of letter forms

Cursive script began its career in the world of administration. Here it
was used for account books, charters and other administrative texts. The
clerks who produced these documents used a much thinner pen than what
was used for formal book script. The flexible tip allowed for a faster
pace and it gave the script a kind of 'casual' feel.

While book script required the pen to be lifted between each stroke that
formed the letter, with cursive script the pen remained on the surface
of the page, with each letter connected by a ligature (or loop). Around
1300 this administrative script was exported to the world of book
production. Students and scholars were early adopters, as were
individuals involved in administrative duties, such as clerks, notaries
and merchants. Civic clerks, for example, are known to have produced
literary manuscripts after-hours, in part for an urban clientele who
paid for their services. These professional users encouraged the
migration of the script

## Pre-Gothic Script


The divider

From the middle of the eleventh century Caroline Minuscule, the dominant
book script at that time, started to include new letter forms. By 1100
the number of letter transformations had grown to such an extent that
the script looked different from Caroline. Slowly the script evolved
into what may be regarded as the second major book script of the Middle
Ages: Gothic (used from c. 1225).

Where Caroline was a unifying script, the transitional script of the
Long Twelfth Century (1075-1225) divided Europe in distinct regions.
Scribes in Europe adopted the new, hybrid writing form at different
speeds, while they also varied the actual appearance of certain letter
forms. Scribes in Germany, for example, were far more conservative than
their peers in France and England.

## Gothic Script


Script standards

Books written between 1250 and 1600 were copied in a variety of Gothic
scripts, some of which sport very different features. On the one side of
the spectrum, there are formal book hands, presenting upright letters
that appear to stand at attention. On the other side there are more
casual cursive scripts, which were written with a thinner pen and
featured connecting loops.

By the early fifteenth century these two script forms were equally
popular, although cursive script was introduced much later in book
production. The introduction of cursive script is part of a broadening
palette of scripts. This expansion may have resulted from the
commercialization of book production - a consequence of the increasing
demands of readers who purchased their books in small urban shops.

## Punctuation


Quoting, quoting, quoting

Most of modern punctuation was available to medieval scribes, although
they sometimes used it differently than we do today. In medieval times,
the period at the end of the line may for example be expressed with a
different symbol, such as a triple dot or even a comma. Medieval
quotation marks are placed in the margin and not in the actual text.
Moreover, the symbol is repeated over and over again in front of the
quotation. When the symbols stop, the quote is over. This practice is a
good example of the simplicity and effectiveness of medieval
punctuation.

# Reading Aids


Navigating the book

Medieval scribes recognized that readers may need some help finding
their way throughout the book or within the texts they contained. Over
time, a number of tools were invented to this end. Many of them we still
use today, such as the page number (foliation), the running title, and
the index.

In medieval manuscripts colorful initials marked the opening of a new
chapter. Thumbing through the book, in search of a particular section of
text, the letters would jump out at the reader. Another important tool
for finding certain information was the rubric: red lines that indicated
what the next section will discuss. Lines highlighted with a green wash
expressed where the reader should start reading. Combined, these three
are a clever lot, helping the reader navigate the book and text at a
fast pace.

## Chapter Number


Chapter and verse

While running titles told the reader what text was found on a particular
page, the chapter number narrowed down its contents even further. As
with many other navigational aids, the practice of numbering the
chapters goes back to the Carolingian Age. They appear to have become
standardized much later, however, perhaps as late as the twelfth
century.

In the thirteenth century, a Bible redaction was made in Paris (the
'Paris Bible') wherein the numbering of the chapters became
standardized, something that was not a given before then. This meant
that two individuals discussing Genesis 15 were actually talking about
the same text for the first time. Many works used in university
education had an additional tool to define the location within the text
even more precisely, the paragraph.

## Paragraph


Gallows

Both longer and shorter medieval texts were usually divided into smaller
sections called paragraphs. In the early days of the paragraph, in the
ninth century, they often had the appearance of a plain 'hook'
resembling the gallows. In the eleventh and twelfth centuries more
sophisticated variants began to appear. First, diagonal lines started to
connect the horizontal and vertical part of the paragraph.

Then, in the age of the scholastic book, the reading aid received our
modern shape: a 'c' with a vertical line struck through its centre. In
scholastic texts this type of paragraph often came in two alternating
colors: red and blue. They appear to mark the 'lector', the passage
that was read out loud in the classroom an which was subsequently
discussed. The c-symbol indicated the start of such a passage, while the
colors made it easier to know when to stop reading.

## Rubric


Spoiler

As Spanish bull fighters know, red is an excellent color for attracting
attention. In manuscripts it was used for the rubric (from the Latin
word for 'red'). Placed at the outset of each chapter, rubrics
provided the reader with an indication of what the following chapter was
about. Now that was handy! Some were very short and simply stated
'about such and such' while others were quite elaborate - spoilers,
even, which revealed in detail what the reader was about to read.

The color red set the words apart from the black or brown words of the
main text. Moreover, the bright color on the otherwise dull page acted
as a reading aid: it helped the reader find certain information in an
efficient manner. If red was not available, scribes would write the
chapter titles in a different script to make it stand out from the main
text.

## Running Title


You are here

Running titles have a long history. They are encountered in manuscripts
made as early as the sixth century. Their main use was to indicate to
the reader where in the book he or she was. Early examples merely reveal
the given book within the text - stating, for example 'Liber primus'
(Book 1). With the coming of the scholastic manuscript in the late
twelfth century, used at universities throughout Europe, the running
titles became more sophisticated. They would often provide the reader
with the full title of the text at a given page.

Moreover, the presentation of the running title became smarter as well.
It became split up and spread out over both top margins of a book
opening: half of the text title on the left page, the other half on the
right page. An equally early adopter of this clever type is the Paris
Bible, a popular tool among preachers on the road. Like students, they
needed to find texts and passages quickly. 'You are here' they seem to
say, 'Now you do your thing'.

## Scribal Colophon


Give me drink

The medieval manuscript lacked a title page, which was invented by
fifteenth-century printers. Without a title page, it can be difficult to
determine where, when, or by whom the book was made. To the medieval
reader, however, much of this information was either irrelevant or
already known. Why state that a text is by Augustine if you can easily
determine that yourself by simply reading the first lines?

Lucky for us, on occasion, scribes added a colophon to the book (almost
always found on the last page). The colophon provides us with similar
information now copied onto title pages. A scribe may state, for
example, in which year he copied the book, where he lived, and, in some
cases, even for whom the book was made. Some colophons provide a more
prosaic fact, for example that a scribe is thirsty: 'This work is
completed, master, now give me a drink!'

## Pen Trials


Testing, one, two, three

Scribes had to constantly adjust the nib of their quill by cutting it
into the right shape. A deformed nib would not supply an even flow of
ink, which resulted in letters that were not fully formed. To test if
the nib was in good shape, scribes would scribble a few swirly lines or
short words on an empty page. We usually find these pen trials in the
back of the book, where empty pages were usually found. Some pages are
loaded with them, including many that are written upside down, which
shows just how little the scribe cared about what his pen produced
during the testing phase. The most famous pen trial written in Dutch is
a poem jotted down by a monk who laments how all birds are building
nests, but that he, alas, is not. Anything goes for a trial.

## Foliation


One, two, three

Until the invention of the page number readers had no means to find a
particular page in the book quickly. The system medieval scribes came up
with is slightly different from our modern pagination. Only one side of
each leaf was given a number, meaning that medieval 'foliation'
referred to not one but two pages. Although the practice of placing a
number sequence throughout the book is observed in some earlier
manuscripts, it became popular in the thirteenth century. Scholars at
the university, for example, found it easier to reference information on
certain pages if they were numbered. The sequential numbering of leaves
allowed for the production of more detailed subject indexes and tables
of contents, both of which are still in use today. Finding information
was now as easy as one, two, three.

Correcting the Text
===================

Flaws be gone!

While a Bible may take a year to produce, a mistake was made in a
split-second. Even scribes who carefully copied their text, a few words
at the time, would ultimately make mistakes. Hasty scribes and those who
did not understand the text they copied, usually made many mistakes. An
important stage in the production of the medieval book was therefore to
correct the text after completion. Some copyists did so superficially,
by quickly going through the freshly written pages.

Others did so more meticulously, carefully comparing their copy to the
original they had copied. There were various tools to remove flaws from
the page. Some were subtle: scribes could inconspicuously add or remove
letters, or write on erasure. Other correction practices jumped off the
page, like crossing out text or adding omitted text in the margin.
Whatever technique the scribe opted for, the ultimate goal was the same,
and obvious: flaws be gone!

Correcting the Text: Erasure
============================

Mistake be gone!

How did a medieval scribe correct a mistake? If you forgot to copy a
word, you could simply insert it in between the lines of the completed
text. If you had written down the wrong word or sentence, correcting the
text could take considerable more effort. In such cases scribes often
resorted to their knife. Dried ink could be 'snapped' off the page
with the knife's tip.

Once the words were removed the correct reading was placed in the gap.
However, a mistake was never fully deleted. You can often still vaguely
see the outlines of the original text on the parchment, much like in a
palimpsest. Moreover, the surface of the spots usually feels slightly
softer, which is gives away that the scribe intervened with a knife.

## Insertion


Insert \[text\] here

When the medieval scribe had finished his work, he or another scribe
usually went through the entire manuscript to make sure he had made no
mistakes. He did so while comparing his work to the exemplar, the book
he had copied his text from. Mistakes he encountered would be erased.

When it became apparent that he had skipped a word or even a whole
sentence or paragraph, he could simply amend it by copying the omitted
text nearby. Readers would also insert missing words themselves, if the
scribe had failed to do so.

## Lacuna


Mind the gap!

Most flaws scribes encountered when they corrected a manuscript could
and would be fixed immediately. Others, however, required some time. The
scribe may have wanted to deliberate the text with someone else or look
something up, for example in a glossary. Such time-consuming fixes were
usually done after the text was fully copied out. In such cases the
scribe would leave room in the text to reinsert the checked reading at a
later stage.

When he had finished copying, a text could potentially have been riddled
with lacunae, standing at the ready to receive the new readings. Scribes
would hide any and all traces of these corrections by using the same ink
color and writing in the same manner, which means they are difficult to
spot. The practice of using lacunae for inserting improved readings is
particularly common in autograph copies. Translators, for example, often
needed some time to find equivalents for unusual words in the original
language.

## Signe de Revoi


X marks the spot

When a scribe noticed that text was missing he usually inserted the
missing words next or over the place where they were needed. The reader
would know when to read them from the context. However, if the omission
encompassed one or more lines it could be challenging to determine at
which point they should be read, and the correction may not have fitted
between the lines of the text.

In such cases the scribe would reach out to the reader and connect the
marginal insertion to its proper location with a symbol called a *signe
de renvoi*. They were usually simple symbols, such as crosses, lines, or
sequences of dots.

Decorating the Book
===================

Colorful books

When the quires were filled with text, the rubrics were in place, and
the scribe had corrected his work, it was time for the finishing
touches. Many medieval books contain some kind of decoration in addition
to the written words, usually executed by a different artisan. There is
a considerable variation in style and quality of decoration, and,
consequently, in cost. At the lower end of the scale is penwork
flourishing, red and blue lines drawn with the pen in various patterns
and shapes. Some of these typify local styles, allowing us to tie a
manuscript to a specific country, city or religious house. At the higher
end of the scale is illumination: often sophisticates little paintings
that included color and often gold. While decorated books stand out
among their other cousins, on the whole they were not very common.

## Doodles


Doodles

Doodles are little bundles of fun. Usually drawn with a pen, they often
appear to be the result of a scribe trying out his pen. In such cases it
was tempting to draw something meaningful, if absurd. Humor is a main
ingredient of the doodle, which may show a mouse chasing a cat, a funny
face staring at the reader, a skeleton with a glass in his hand, or a
husband and wife in the midst of an argument.

Doodles often incorporate such native elements of the page. Various
doodles made by children also survive in schoolbooks, which shows that
doodling may also be a universal sign of boredom in the classroom.

## Gilding


Dazzling

Some medieval readers preferred pretty pictures and shiny decoration in
their books. Not only did the sparkling page appeal to them, it also
proved their economic status, or that the gift they gave was special.
Undecorated books were also expensive, but decorated copies cost a true
fortune, especially if gold was used. In a process called gilding, the
decorator would apply an ultra-thin film of flattened gold to the page,
which looked not unlike our modern tin foil. Golden shapes were not
appended directly to the surface of the parchment, but that they were
stretched over little 'hills' of plaster. This way the gold would
catch the light from different angles, maximizing its dazzling effect.

## Historiated Initial


One-letter stories

Normally, letters work together to form words that present a story. From
time to time, however, we encounter a letter that contains a narrative
all by itself. Initials that marked the beginning of the text could
contains an identifiable scene or figure that often related to the text.
The meaning of some historiated initials can only be understood by
reading the story they initiate. Miniatures contained even more
extensive narratives.

## Miniatures


Mini paintings

Miniatures represent the most elaborate decoration on the medieval page.
They encompass scenes for which a significant amount of space - and
color - was reserved. Some are boxed in by a frame, while others appear
to float mid air. Their size and level of detail can vary widely. Books
of Hours often contain at least one full-page miniature. Some of these
were mass-produced and could be picked out by a client as he ordered the
book.

More common are smaller miniatures of half a page or less. These were
normally added after the copying of the text was completed: the scribe
would bring the completed quire to the decorator, who would subsequently
do his thing. Miniatures are in effect mini paintings executed by
well-known artists: they added significantly to the bill of the reader
who commissioned a book.

## Penwork Flourishing


Drunk decoration

In medieval times, penwork flourishing was the quickest and easiest way
to add some color to the page. This style of decoration typically
involves thin lines, usually in red and blue, drawn with a pen rather
than a brush. The swirly lines form lively patterns with unexpected
twists and turns, creating miniature mazes in which your eye gets lost
easily. If you look carefully you may recognize familiar objects: a
tree, the moon, pearls, a smiling face. The central figure attracting
all of this artistic attention is the capital letter that needed
decorating. The penwork decoration supported an important function of
this letter, navigating the reader to the beginning of a new section of
text. The specific flourishing patterns can often be pinpointed to a
certain city or region, which turns these happy lines into a useful tool
for the book historian

Binding the Book
================

Packing it up

All that was left when the book was copied, corrected and decorated, was
to bind the quires together. If a book was made commercially, the client
would bring the complete quires to a binder and go over the options. At
the lower end of the scale are so-called limp bindings. Such bindings
consist of a stiff parchment sheet wrapped around the quires and
attached to them with stitches. They were very popular among students
because of their low costs.

At the other end of the scale were richly decorated bindings with wooden
boards and blind-tooled decoration. The motifs used in the decoration
can sometimes help us to relate a binding to a certain atelier or city.
Some even tell us who the binder was. 'Godefridus me fecit' says a
binding produced by Godefridus de Block, a fourteenth-century binder in
Brussels. Very rare are so-called 'treasure bindings', which covered
books, that needed to look handsome and rich, such as gifts or a Gospel
Book used for altar display.

## Fragments


Stowaway

When Gutenberg invented moving type, handwritten books quickly went out
of fashion. Many of these books became the victims of recycling at the
hands of binders, who cut up manuscripts to use them for added support
in the book bindings they made for new printed copies. Fragments could
also serve as a flyleaf. Like cars at a scrap yard, medieval books were
mutilated and plundered for parts until almost nothing was left.

Single pages and small strips were cut away from handwritten books and
pasted onto the boards and spines of their printed cousins. There they
remained, hidden out of sight, covered by the leather of the binding. In
spite of their mutilated appearance, these fragments can be of great
importance. The early history of the Bible, for example, could not have
been written without the fragmentary evidence retrieved from
early-modern bindings. While of modest size, the stowaways form
'blips' on the map of Europe, showing that a certain text was
available at a certain moment and location.

## Boards


Woodwork

Medieval manuscripts, even small ones, can be surprisingly heavy. Giant
Bibles, large volumes that can stand half a meter tall, weigh as much as
twenty-five kilos. It requires two library staff members to carry the
object to your table. Much of this weight is produced by the boards of
the bookbinding. To protect the stack of quires that made up the actual
manuscript, a wooden board was placed on the front and back. The quires
were then tied to thin leather straps, which were pushed through
channels drilled through the boards. The straps were pegged into the
wood. It produced a surprisingly firm binding, which lasted for
centuries. All this crafty woodwork is presently hidden from our eyes
because the boards were subsequently covered with leather (which was
often fitted with decorations. Thousands of pieces of medieval trees are
hidden inside book bindings, like a shelved mini forest.

## Bosses and Clasps


Add-ons

Many medieval books were a joy to look at even when they were closed.
Various shiny 'add-ons' were drilled in and attached to the wooden
boards on the outside of the book. The most pronounced of these are the
so-called 'bosses', protective metal pieces attached to each corner of
the binding. Much more common are clasps, pieces of metal that kept the
book closed.

These were needed because, unlike paper, parchment has a tendency to
expand, which could push the book open. A clasp was therefore needed to
keep the book closed when not in use, protecting the text inside. Also
frequently added to the binding is decoration - flower motifs, playful
line patterns, and at times even a painted scene. Such decorative
elements on the outside of the binding became particularly common near
the end of the Middle Ages.

## Limp Binding


Wrapper

The majority of surviving medieval bindings made use of wooden boards
which helped to protect the book and to keep the quires in place. The
so-called 'limp binding' is another type of binding that was in
popular use in medieval times. Its most notable feature is the absence
of boards, which explains its name. With a limp binding the quires are
covered by a plain parchment wrapper without the support of wooden
boards.

The quires in these bindings -- usually a limited number -- are attached
to the outer parchment with thin strings, which are visible on the
outside. A limp binding resulted in a lighter manuscript, which meant it
was easier to transport. This type of binding also decreased the cost,
given that wood was not needed and that the binding process was less
time-consuming. This is likely why this type of bookbinding is so
popular among medieval students.

Using the Book
==============


Most medieval bookstores were empty because books were too expensive to
have in stock. Instead, each customer would have a long talk with the
shopkeeper, who would ask how much he wanted to spend, what materials he
preferred, what kind of writing style should be used for the text -- and
so on. The medieval book is therefore always one of a kind.

Users often modified the manuscript post-production, bringing it even
more in tune with their needs. Bookmarks were added for quick access to
favorite chapters, while nota signs and maniculae in the margin marked
important passages. Glosses and slips with notes were inserted where the
text needed clarification.

## Bookmark


Fossilized taste

The bookmark guided the reader to the beginning of a favorite chapter or
a significant section of the book. Flowers or leaves, which were
sometimes drawn into the manuscript, marked the page in the most elegant
and practical manner. More permanent and secure, however, are bookmarks
made from a piece of parchment that was pasted onto the page.

What a great thought, that medieval fingers inserted these stubs to get
to their literary fix! Some bookmarks are fragments of redundant
manuscripts, from which they were cut as a form of recycling. The stubs
are interesting to book historians because they show what texts of
passages were enjoyed by individuals that lived hundreds of years ago.
They are the fossilized remains of medieval literary taste.

## Gloss


Add-on

From the moment we learn to read as a child we are told not to write in
our books. Still, we often do, especially when we use the book for
school. If it is not our own copy, we may write with pencil, so that our
personal thoughts may be removed after use. Medieval readers had no
problem writing in the margins, and apparently had no qualms about using
permanent ink. In fact, it is hard to point out a manuscript that does
not contain any such add-ons. Some of these notes (or glosses) were
extensive, and the scribe had to extend the margins to accommodate them.

## Manicula


Helping Hand

With a nota-sign the reader expressed that a passage was noteworthy or
deserved a closer read. The manicula (Latin for 'little hand') was
another means to do so. As with 'nota-signs', the actual form of the
pointing finger varies considerably. Readers may have had their own
unique design to distinguish their hands from those of other readers.

The hands are sometimes accompanied by short notes, which the reader may
have written in response to the text. As with bookmarks and nota-signs,
maniculae show us what information were deemed important or relevant to
an individual long ago. In that sense they lend a helping hand to the
book historian as much as they did to the medieval reader.

## Nota


Note to self

While the bookmark guided the reader to an important chapter or text,
the nota-sign marked a significant passage or sentence on the page. From
time to time readers noticed something in the text worth highlighting.
In such cases they wrote the Latin 'nota' in the margin, which means
to 'examine' or 'inspect'. While some of these nota-signs may have
served as a reminder to check something, others appear to express a more
generic 'attention!' like the 'manicula' did.

The nota-sign is not written like a normal word. Rather, its four
letters are reshuffled and stretched so as to form a unique symbol. This
was likely done to distinguish a reader's passages from those marked by
other users of the book, such as his fellow brethren in the monastery.

## Notes


Sticky note

Readers had the ability to mark important passages with a nota-sign or a
manicula. When a passage prompted a response or an explanation, the
reader could provide these in the form of a marginal gloss. More
extensive notes were sometimes written on tiny paper or parchment slips.

Students are known to have used them to take down notes in the classroom
or when they were studying a text at home. Few of them survive today.
Not only were they easy to lose, but many of them were actually thrown
out, similar to the fate of our modern day 'sticky notes'. In some
manuscripts they survive because they were tucked in between the pages.
