---
layout: manuscript
handle: https://hdl.handle.net/1887.1/item:1671012
route: religion-devotion
manifest: "https://transcription.digitalscholarship.nl/iiif/5/manifest"
title: Daily excercises
shelfmark: BPL 2480
origin: "South-Holland, Netherlands"
ms_date: "1528"
ms_title: Gebedenboek 
ms_title_en: Prayer book
material: paper and parchment
pages: "92 fols."
dimensions: "132 x 93 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "16 lines"
questions:
- a6
- b3
tags: [Religious Institutions,Religion and Devotion]
---

When she was just eleven years old, Alijt Baernaertsdochter entered the
Convent of Mariënpoel in Oegstgeest, the Netherlands, which belonged to
the order of [St. Augustine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Augustinians). In 1528, when
Alijt was 42 years old, she either purchased this prayer book or
received it as a gift. In addition to daily prayers, prayer books like
this also contained devotional exercises for specific times of the day
or the year. Since nuns and laypeople were not always able to read
Latin, prayer books were often written in the regional common language.
This prayer book encourages contemplation on various subjects depending
on the day of the week. For example, on Sundays Alijt would have
contemplated eternal joy and happiness in heaven. On Mondays, however,
Alijt was urged to contemplate death which would, according to this
exercise (see fols. 1v-8v), help her to refrain from sin. Following the
daily meditations (from fol. 52v and beyond) this book contains prayers
for various other occasions.

We know that the scribe who copied this prayer book was named Aernt
Janszoon, from the city of Oudewater, because in fol. 91v he wrote
*"Bidt voer broeder aernt jans soen van oudewater om goods willen"*
(Please pray for friar Aernt Janszoon of Oudewater for God's sake).[^1] In
contrast to a highly decorated [book of hours](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_of_hours), this manuscript is
simply and sparsely decorated. Each exercise starts with a
pen-flourished initial, but otherwise only the first page (see fol. 2r.)
has elaborate decoration. The scribe has added so-called *cadels,*
extensions of the ascending and descending strokes of the letters, on
the first letter of the first line of every page.

[^1]: [Copying the Text: Scribal Colophon]({{ "/glossary/#" | relative_url }})

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 134 %}
{% cite bouboeken --locator 88,148 %}