---
layout: manuscript
route: religion-devotion
manifest: https://transcription.digitalscholarship.nl/iiif/5/manifest
title: Recycling manuscripts
shelfmark: BPL 2795
origin: "Brabant, Netherlands"
ms_date: "1525-1550"
ms_title: Rituale
ms_title_en: Rituals
material: parchment
pages: "97 fols."
dimensions: "120 x 86 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "17 lines"
questions:
- a1
- b5
---

When a manuscript was no longer needed, it was often recycled. One way
to "dispose" of the unwanted manuscript, was to wash or scrape the pages
so to erase the ink; it could now be used in the production of new
manuscripts. Manuscripts recycled in this manner are called
palimpsets.\* The leaves of this particular manuscript, which were also
made from palimpsests, still show the remains of the erased text. They
originally belonged to a manuscript with glossed canon laws in Italian
from the fourteenth century.

The "renewed" manuscript was filled with rules for members of the [Order
of St. Clare](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poor_Clares). St. Clare, a
follower of Francis of Assisi and the foundress of the female
counterpart of the Franciscan order, had written the rules herself in
the thirteenth century. They are the first known monastic guidelines
written by a woman. The scribe of this manuscript was also a woman;
Sister Marijken Breakmans was her name. She has added a colophon in fol.
97v asking the reader to pray for her soul. Someone has added pieces of
paper with corrections\* or additions to the text on a later date (see
for example fol. 91r). This manuscript also contains [gothic music
notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medieval_music).

**\*** **Choosing a Writing Support: Parchment Palimpsest
\* Using the Book: Notes**

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 230 %}