---
layout: manuscript
route: religion-devotion
manifest: "https://lab.library.universiteitleiden.nl/transcription/iiif/110/manifest"
title: "Sermons"
shelfmark: BPL 2482
origin: "Netherlands"
ms_date: "1400-1425"
ms_title: Sermones de tempore et de sanctis
ms_title_en: Sermons
material: paper and parchment
pages: "251 fols."
dimensions: "144 x 105 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "c.27 lines"
questions:
- a5
- b6
---

In the beginning of the thirteenth century, Dominic of Caleruega
(1170-1221) founded the [Dominican Order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dominican_Order). Members of the
order were often called preachers (or in Dutch: Predikheren) because
they preached the Gospel to educate people and combat heresy. One of the
most famous Dominicans was archbishop and author [Jacobus de Voragine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacobus_da_Varagine)
(c.1228-1298) (see also ...). Jacobus published multiple volumes of
collections of [sermons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sermon). This
manuscript contains his *Sermones de tempore et de sanctis*. (sermons
for feast days and saints' days ) It consists of sermons for Sundays,
Lent, saints' days and other holy days. The manuscript belonged to the
convent of the Virgin in Gaesdonk (see also BPL 2231 and BPL 2483).
The sermons in this manuscript are all written in Latin. This means that
the sermons were not aimed at lay people, many of whom could not
understand Latin, but at the clergy. The sermons are separated from each
other by a blank page. The manuscript still has its original binding.
The flyleaf at the end of the book is a fragment of a calendar, probably
from the fourteenth century. Even though the manuscript was probably
used by the monks of the convent, there are few annotations and traces
of use in the margins. Perhaps the book was not used regularly but
mainly served as inspiration for other sermons.

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 134 %}