---
layout: manuscript
route: liberal-arts-education

title: From Catholic to Protestant
shelfmark: BPL 304
origin: "Northern Netherlands/Germany"
ms_date: "1466"
ms_creator: Henricus de Hervordia
ms_title: Glossarium Latinum
ms_title_en: Latin Lexicon
material: paper
pages: "279 fols."
dimensions: "293 x 211 mm"
columns: "2 cols."
lines: "34-45 lines"
questions:
- a2
- b8
---

This manuscript contains a vocabulary from the fifteenth century. Its
structure is very clear: all words are written down in alphabetical
order and divided into three parts. Part one describes nouns (fol. <span data-fol="1r" class="fref">1r</span> -
fol. <span data-fol="229v" class="fref">229v</span>), part two covers verbs (fols. <span data-fol="229v" class="fref">229v</span> - <span data-fol="273r" class="fref">273r</span>) and part three
covers adverbs, conjunctions, prepositions and interjections (fols. <span data-fol="273r" class="fref">273r</span> - <span data-fol="279r" class="fref">279r</span>).
This made it very easy for people to look up the meaning of a
certain word. The empty spaces in the text were originally reserved for
illumination but were never filled in.

Some of the word explanations are in medieval Dutch or German. This
makes sense because the manuscript belonged to the sisters of the
Convent of St. Catharine in
[Heusden](https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heusden_(vestingstad)) (see
pasted fragment on flyleaves), whose knowledge of Dutch/German must have
been profound. After the Reformation reached the city of Heusden the
manuscript ended up with the local Protestant church.

Though the scribe didn't include any type of decoration, such as colored
initials, he did write each first letter of a described word in capital,
in order to make the them stand out.
The manuscript still has a medieval leather binding[^1] (from c. 1500)
with blind tooled decorations of the four
[Evangelists](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Four_Evangelists), the Lamb
of God, the head of Christ, and a man with a hat and various flowers. On
the binding is written: "*Vocabularius*".

[^1]: [Binding the Book]({{ "/glossary/#binding-the-book" | relative_url }})

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 102 %}
{% cite markatharijneconvent --locator 175 %}