---
layout: manuscript
route: diy-manuals

title: A Surgeon's Manual
shelfmark: BPL 3094
sort_as: BPL 3094
origin: "Southern Netherlands, Flanders"
ms_date: "1475-1500"
ms_title: Medical Compilation
material: paper
pages: "159 fols."
dimensions: "130 x 94 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "18 lines"
questions:
- a2
- b4
---

This little manuscript, written in the last quarter of the fifteenth
century, was probably at one point in the possession of a Flemish
surgeon. The text of the manuscript, written in Dutch, gives a
description of various diseases and how to treat them. The manual
contains a small number of drawings that demonstrate how a surgeon
should perform certain procedures and which instruments he should use.
These images were more practical than detailed descriptions because they
take up less space on the page. For example, fol. <span data-fol="82v" class="fref">82v</span> shows a drawing
depicting how different types of broken bones could be mended.

The contents of the book were partly derived from the famous book
*Chirurgie,* written by the Flemish surgeon **Jan Yperman**. Yperman was
educated in Paris and wrote his book in the early fourteenth century.
The unknown author of this manual probably also borrowed some of its
contents from other famous surgeons at the time. He quotes, amongst
others, the physicians
**[Hippocrates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hippocrates),
[Galenus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galen), and
[Dioscorides](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pedanius_Dioscorides).**

We can see from the pattern of wear that the book was used by a
practicing surgeon. The edges of the pages almost crumble off due to the
many times they have been turned. On some pages you can even see
smudges. Based on the numbering of the folia we can see that at one time
this manual must have been bigger, however now there is a gap of 80
folio missing.

{% cite gumillustrated %}