---
layout: manuscript
handle: https://hdl.handle.net/1887.1/item:1671155
route: religion-devotion
manifest: 
title: Marcus' Book of Hours
shelfmark: BPL 2706
origin: "Northern Netherlands, Netherlands"
ms_date: "1463?"
ms_title: Getijdenboek
ms_title_en: Book of Hours
material: parchment
pages: "262 fols."
dimensions: "152 x 110 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "21 lines"
questions:
- a2
- b5
tags: [Book of Hours,Vernacular,Computus,Passion,Religious Institutions,Religion and Devotion]
---

In the middle of the seventeenth century, Marcus Jansen from Amersfoort
obtained this [Book of Hours](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_of_hours). To personalize this
manuscript, that was first in the possession of the convent of St. Agnes
in Amersfoort, Marcus wrote down his family history on the flyleaves. He
writes about the death of his wife Annetjen Willems in 1652 and about
the marriage to his second wife Elysabet Syberts in 1653. We know that
Marcus himself died in 1670 and was buried on the 'Cattuijsers
kerckhoeff' from an additional note written by the person that obtained
the Book of Hours after Marcus' death.
This manuscript is written by one scribe and contains different texts.
It discusses the Last Supper, the Passion of Jesus and his resurrection
based on the Gospel harmony by Johannes Scutken (- 1423). Scutken was a
student of Geert Grote and he translated the New Testament in Dutch.
This translation was very popular. It is estimated that over one hundred
and fifty manuscripts with his work have survived. The second text in
this manuscript is a Dutch translation of an excerpt from [Henricus Suso](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Suso)'s *Horologium aeternae
sapientiae* (The Clock of Wisdom)*.* The manuscript is beautifully
decorated with pen-flourished initials. F.12v and f.13r show three
computus circles for determining the date of Easter. From the text in
the circle on f.12v we learn that the manuscript was written in 1463,
for it asks the reader to start looking for the Golden Number from
'drientsestig' (sixty-three).

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 224 %}
{% cite desverspreiding %}