---
layout: manuscript
route: religion-devotion
manifest: 
title: For want of a nail
shelfmark: BPL 2851
origin: "Germany/Netherlands"
ms_date: "1450-1475"
ms_title: Processionale
ms_title_en: Processional
material: paper
pages: "33 fols."
dimensions: "198 x 137 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "5 lines"
questions:
- a4
- b8
---

Chanting has been a common practice for expressing devotion since the
beginning of Christianity. However, initially the melodies of these
chants were not written down but transmitted orally. A type of notation
was developed in the ninth century to annotate the words of the chant
with a rough indication of the melody. These predecessors of musical
notes were called [neumes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neume), and
while they did not indicate notes or rhythm, they did function as
reminders of the song and showed the general shape of the melody. When a
German scribe wrote down a neume he used sharp pen strokes resulting in
a mark shaped like a horseshoe nail, explaining why this type of musical
annotation is also often called *Hufnagel* script.

This manuscript was made in or near Germany and was probably meant for a
cantor, the person who led prayer and singing, and who was usually in
charge of maintaining the liturgical books. It contains songs that were
performed at the altars of various saints during what is known as a
[procession](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Procession) - a ritual in
which the sacrament, a holy statue, or relics of a saint were carried
through a town. The neumes in this fifteenth century manuscript are
written on staves, an addition that was not present in older
manuscripts. Someone has added new lines with music, possibly in the
seventeenth century, which are now difficult to read because of water
damage.

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 236 %}

