---
layout: manuscript
route: diy-manuals
manifest: 
title: Medical recipes and remedies
shelfmark: BPL 3284
origin: "Germany"
ms_date: "1500-1550?"
ms_title: Arzneibuch
ms_title_en: Pharmacopoeia
material: paper
pages: "153 fols."
dimensions: "213 x 147 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "16-40 lines"
questions:
- a8
- b9
---

This manuscript is a
"[pharmacopoeia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pharmacopoeia)". The
term is derived from the Greek word *pharmakopoiia* which means
"drug-making". A pharmacopoeia contains descriptions for the preparation
and identification of medicines and was very useful for
[apothecaries](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apothecary). One of the
owners of this pharmacopoeia was Adam Krentzer, who wrote his name on
the inside of the binding. This manuscript consists of nine parts, all
written in German but easily distinguishable because of the variation in
lay-out and script\*. Many readers of this manuscript have added remarks
to the text, some of them even in Hebrew script (see for example fol.
70v).

When the parts of this manuscript were bound together, it received a
parchment binding recycled from an unknown manuscript. The letters of
this former manuscript are still visible on the binding. To protect the
fragile paper of the pharmacopoeia, parchment strips of another
manuscript were pasted to the end of the leaves, which prevented the
threads of the binding *from cutting* into the paper. The readers'
notes in the manuscript show that the pharmacopoeia was still used
regularly in the sixteenth and seventeenth century. The recipes were,
apparently, still relevant for apothecaries in these times.

**\* Copying the Text: Script**

{% cite mmdc %}
