---
layout: manuscript
route: liberal-arts-education

title: A helping hand
shelfmark: BPL 194
origin: "Germany or Netherlands"
ms_date: "1000-1100"
ms_creator: Guido of Arezzo
ms_title: Micrologus
ms_title_en: On Music
ms_title_extra: and other texts
material: parchment
pages: "46 fols."
dimensions: "171 x 103 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "31 lines"
questions:
- a1
- b10
---

This manuscript contains two important texts by [Guido of Arezzo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guido_of_Arezzo): the *Micrologus*
and the *Dialogus*. Arezzo (c. 991- c. 1033) was an Italian monk and
music theorist. He is credited with the invention of the use of staff
lines to annotate music. Arezzo is also famous for "[The Guidonian Hand](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guidonian_hand)", a mnemonic system
that teaches how to sing from sight. An example of a Guidonian Hand can
be found in Fol. <span data-fol="1r" class="fref">1r</span> of this manuscript. Once a singer was familiar with
the Guidonian Hand system he could easily sing notes that corresponded
to whichever part of the hand the music teacher pointed to. There are
several other tools throughout the manuscript, including diagrams that
aided the reader in better understanding the music theory that was
described in the texts.

During the Middle Ages the study of music was a very theoretical
endeavor, and thus was broken up into three phases. The lowest phase was
the study of the human voice and the music made by instruments. The
second phase studied the *musica humana,* the harmony between body and
soul. The third phase was the study of [*musica mundane*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Musica_universalis) - the
harmony of the cosmos. It was hoped that by studying the numerical
ratios in music, students would be able to fathom all levels of this
complicated subject.

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 94 %}
{% cite gereuropa --locator 38-41 %}