---
layout: manuscript
handle: https://hdl.handle.net/1887.1/item:1667560
route: religion-devotion

title: Solitary devotion
shelfmark: BPL 1949
sort_as: BPL 1949
origin: "Roermond, Netherlands"
ms_date: "1450-1500"
ms_title: Devotae Allocutiones 
ms_title_en: Devotional Texts
material: paper and parchment
pages: "164 fols."
dimensions: "142 x 105 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "27 lines"
questions:
- a4
- b3
---

This manuscript, which contains various religious texts written in
Latin, was formerly owned by the Monastery of the Virgin of Bethlehem in
Roermond, Netherlands. The monastery belonged to the
[Carthusians](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carthusians) (see fol. <span data-fol="1r" class="fref">1r</span>),
a particularly strict religious order of Western Europe. Although
Carthusian monks lived together communally in the monastery, called a
"charterhouse", they spent most of their time in the solitude of their
private cells, in contemplative silence. The rule of silence was lifted
during *spatiamentum,* the monks' weekly walk, and on some Sundays and
holy-days. Each day the monks prayed the [Liturgy of
Hours](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liturgy_of_the_Hours) and meditated
on other devotional texts. This manuscript (BPL 1949) was probably used
for personal meditation. The library at the Monastery of the Virgin of
Bethlehem was the most important library in the Roermond area.

The pages of this manuscript contain rubrics and are decorated with
colored initials. Most of the manuscript's quires contain paper leaves,
though some are made from parchment.[^1] On both fol. <span data-fol="42v" class="fref">42v</span> and fol. <span data-fol="43r" class="fref">43r</span> we
find a poem with an interesting layout. Instead of writing the rhyming
letters at the end of each individual line the scribe has written the
rhyming parts only once and connected them to the corresponding
sentences with braces. The last sentence of the text has been crossed
out with red ink (see fol. <span data-fol="163r" class="fref">163r</span>).

[^1]: [Choosing a writing support]({{ "/glossary/#choosing-a-writing-support" | relative_url }})

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 114 %}
{% cite pangeheim %}
{% cite pancarthusians %}