---
layout: manuscript
route: religion-devotion

title: Psalms and bloodletting
shelfmark: BPL 2856
origin: "Den Bosch, Netherlands"
ms_date: "1450-1500"
ms_title: Psalterium
ms_title_en: Psalter
material: parchment
pages: "228 fols."
dimensions: "223 x 152 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "21 lines"
questions:
- a1
- b12
---

Much like physicians of the day, many convents during the Middle Ages
recommended its members participate in
[bloodletting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloodletting#Middle_Ages)
at specific times each year. Monks and nuns often performed this
practice themselves, without the help of a doctor. People believed that
bloodletting could help against various ailments and could encourage
spiritual asceticism. Considering this, it is not so surprising that
this fifteenth century Psalter contains a table for favorable
bloodletting times and locations (see fols. <span class="fref" data-fol="7r">7r</span> - <span data-fol="12v" class="fref">12v</span>).
Additionally, it contains a calendar to calculate the dates of Easter,
the Book of Psalms from the Bible, and a description of the translation
of St. Catharina. The texts are written in both Dutch and Latin.

The pen-flourished initials[^1] of this manuscript (see fol. <span data-fol="14r" class="fref">14</span>) are
typical for the Convent of Mariënwater in Rosmalen (Netherlands), which
is illustrated by the flowing pen strokes that curl into the margin. The
Convent of Mariënwater was the first convent of the [Bridgettine
Order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bridgettines) in the Low Countries.
In fol. <span data-fol="141v" class="fref">141v</span> we can read that the manuscript once belonged to Marghrieta
Peters Lamerts, prioress of Mariënwater, and that it remained in use in
the convent until the end of the eighteenth century. There are
annotations included from this period. By then, however, the convent was
no longer situated in Rosmalen but had moved to Uden.

[^1]: [Decorating the Book: Penwork Flourishing]({{ "/glossary/#penwork-flourishing" | relative_url }})

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 236 %}
{% cite kolbuscodis --locator nr.85 %}
{% cite korkriezels --locator nr.153 %}