---
layout: manuscript
route: liberal-arts-education
manifest: https://transcription.digitalscholarship.nl/iiif/5/manifest
title: Cases of conscience
shelfmark: BPL 164
origin: "Germany?"
ms_date: "1300-1500"
ms_creator: Astesanus of Asti
ms_title: Summa de casibus conscientiae
ms_title_en: Cases of conscience
ms_title_extra: and other texts
material: parchment
pages: "27 fols."
dimensions: "208 x 152 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "33 lines"
questions:
- a5
- b5
---

The study of canon law was an important aspect of the curriculum taught
at Medieval universities. Young prospective clerics often opted for a
career as a lawyer and thus had to learn behave professionally in court.
Students therefore studied treatises,
*[summae](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Summa)* and manuals on
confession and penance. These books contain rulings from councils,
courts, [synods](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synod), and decrees by
various popes. This manuscript contains part of the *Summa de casibus conscientiae* (On Cases of Conscience), an influential book written by
the Franciscan lawyer and theologian [Astesanus de Asti](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Astesanus_of_Asti) (? -- c. 1330).
He was probably commissioned by Cardinal [Giovanni Orisini](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giovanni_Gaetano_Orsini_(cardinal))
to write this summa.

The parts of the Cases of Conscience that are copied in this manuscript
comprise the *De significatione verborum* (On the Meaning of Words).
This part was used as a reference for legal usage in the thirteenth
century and was often circulated independently from the other parts of
the full text. Explanations for key words from the main text were
written in the margin, making it easier for students to find the
meanings of the words. Even though the manuscript has minimal
decorations, the illuminator had added one fun element by drawing a
little face inside in an initial on fol. 17v.[^1]

[^1] [Decorating the Book: Doodles]({{ "/glossary/#" | relative_url }})

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 76 %}