---
layout: manuscript
handle: https://hdl.handle.net/1887.1/item:848872
route: religion-devotion

title: One hundred meditations
shelfmark: BPL 2627
origin: "Bruges and South Holland, Netherlands"
ms_date: "1400 and 1450-1475"
ms_creator: Henricus Suso
ms_title: Honderd Articulen
ms_title_en: Little book of eternal wisdom
ms_title_extra: and other texts
material: parchment
pages: "123 fols."
dimensions: "236 x 155 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "16-17 lines"
questions:
- a5
- b4
---

The desire for a closer connection with God drew increasingly more lay
people to the religious life towards the end of the Middle Ages. The
first part of this manuscript contains one of the most popular
meditation texts directed at lay people of the Middle Ages: [Henry
Suso's](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Suso) *Das Büchlein der ewigen Weisheit* (The Little Book of Eternal Wisdom). This book, an
adaptation of the Passion of Jesus, is divided into one hundred
meditations that were designed to engender compassion with the suffering
of Christ. Suso's adaptation differs from the adaptation of the Passion
written by [Jacob van
Maerlant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacob_van_Maerlant) (see BPL
1800). Suso, for example, leaves out things he regarded as common
knowledge, such as the Crucifixion. The second part of this manuscript
consists of a
[litany](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Litany#Catholic_litanies),
psalms, and prayers.

The two parts of this manuscript were bound together in the sixteenth
century. Around that time the manuscript belonged the Convent of St.
Bernard in Antwerp, Belgium (see the note of administrator Livinius de
Smedt at fol. <span data-fol="1r" class="fref">1r</span>). The manuscript is beautifully decorated with painted
initials. Fol. <span data-fol="14r" class="fref">14r</span> contains a historiated initial[^1] of two angels who
cover Christ with a blanket. In the lower margin the scribe has added
catchwords (the first word of the new quire) which made it easier for
the binder to put the quires in the right order. In the second part of
the manuscript, the catchwords are almost cut off in the binding
process.

[^1]: [Decorating the Book: Historiated Initial]({{ "/glossary/#historiated-initial" | relative_url }})

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 206 %}
{% cite aelmiddelnederlandse --locator 151 %}