---
layout: manuscript
route: liberal-arts-education

title: Saints and dates
shelfmark: BPL 226
origin: "West-Germany, Germany"
ms_date: "1100-1200"
ms_creator: Helpericus
ms_title: De Computo
ms_title_en: On Calculation
ms_title_extra: and other texts
material: parchment
pages: "59 fols."
dimensions: "134 x 91 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "c.20 lines"
questions:
- a8
- b9
---

Religious life in the Middle Ages was structured according to the
[Liturgical Calendar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liturgical_year),
which determined when feast days were celebrated. The date of some of
these celebrations varied each year because they depended on the
position of the moon. For example, Easter is celebrated on the Sunday
after the first full moon of spring. (see BPL 154). This manuscript,
which belonged to the Convent of St. Pantaleon in Cologne, contains
three texts that are closely connected to the Liturgical Year. The first
part of this manuscript contains [Helpericus van Auxerre's](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Helperic_von_Auxerre) *De computo.* The [*computus*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computus)
circles on fol. 32v could be used to determine the correct date of
Easter. The second part, a
[martyrology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_Martyrology), is a
list of the feast days of martyrs and saints. Lastly, this manuscript
contains excerpts from the writings of [Walafrid Strabo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walafrid_Strabo) on chronology and
calendars.

When the three parts of this manuscript were bound together the binder
used recycled pages from a twelfth-century text on grammar to create the
flyleaves[^1], in addition to using an antiphonary from the sixteenth
century for the cover. The cover was separated from the manuscript and
now has its own shelfmark (BPL 2515: 40). At some point the leaves of
fol. 37 and fol. 38 were extended by sewing on pieces of parchment.
These page extensions are quite noticeable because the binder did not
cut the leaves to a uniform size.

[^1]: [Binding the Book: Fragments]({{ "/glossary/#fragments" | relative_url }})

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 100 %}