---
layout: manuscript
route: religion-devotion
manifest: "https://lab.library.universiteitleiden.nl/transcription/iiif/110/manifest"
title: "Mistake or Forgery?"
shelfmark: "BPL 1800"
origin: ""
genre: ""
material: ""
pages: ""
dimensions: "mm"
columns: " col."
lines: " lines"
questions:
- |
  Q1

- |
  Q2

- |
  Q3
literature:
- "J.P. Gumbert, *Illustrated Inventory of Medieval Manuscripts in Latin script in the Netherlands* (Hilversum 2009) 110-112."
- "M. van den Berg, *De Noordnederlandse historiebijbel. Een kritische editie met inleiding en aantekeningen van hs. Ltk. 231 uit de Leidse    Universiteitsbibliotheek* (Hilversum 1998) 107, 155, 160."
- "M. van den Berg, 'De Noordnederlandse historiebijbel. Verhaal en moraal in bijbelse (en wereldlijke) geschiedenis'. In: A. den Hollander & al. (eds.), Middelnederlandse bijbelvertalingen (Hilversum 2007) 59-75."
---

This manuscript contains a Dutch History Bible. [History
Bibles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bible_Historiale) differ from
regular vernacular bibles in that they offer no close translation of the
[Vulgate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vulgate) bible, the standard
Latin version of the bible at the time, but loose adaptations of the
Vulgate combined with information from history books and apocryphal
texts. History Bibles were written as a narrative that was easy to read.
There are two Dutch History Bibles that have originated independently
from each other. This manuscript contains the so called Second History
Bible. Its contents are based on the Vulgate, [Jacob van
Maerlant'](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacob_van_Maerlant)s
*Rijmbijbel* (Bible of Rhymes) and Petrus' Comestor's *Historica
Scholastica.*\
This manuscript consists of two parts. The first part dates to 1530 and
the second part to 1459. The part dating to 1530 was written to replace
the original text. The manuscript is rubricated and decorated with
colored initials. From f.128 this manuscripts differs from other
manuscripts that contain the Second History Bible. The scribe probably
copied this part from another source that was closer to the Vulgate. At
the end of the text (f.245r) the scribe writes 'Et sic est finis MCCC
XXII' claiming that he finished this book in 1322. Did he inadvertently
copy the date from his exemplar, that is the manuscript that he was
copying, or did he write it on purpose in the hope of convincing people
that this manuscript was older than it actually was?
