---
layout: manuscript
handle: https://hdl.handle.net/1887.1/item:1669553
route: religion-devotion

title: Breviarium
shelfmark: BPL 2905
origin: "Den Bosch, Netherlands"
ms_date: "c.1450-1500"
ms_title: Breviarium 
ms_title_en: Breviary
material: parchment
pages: "186 fols."
dimensions: "230 x 155 mm"
columns: "2 cols."
lines: "34 lines"
questions:
- a2
- b12
---

The [book of hours](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_of_hours) was one
of the most popular books in the later Middle Ages, especially amongst
lay people, who used it for private devotion. Members of the clergy,
however, preferred the
[*breviarium*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Breviary) for their daily
prayers. The *breviarium* not only contained the liturgy of hours but
also prayers for specific holy-days, as well as a choir psalter and
litanies. Both the books of hours and breviaries contained a [calendar
of the feast days](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calendar_of_saints) of
different saints. It is often possible to locate the precise location of
production of a manuscript based on the saints that are mentioned on
these calendars. For example, fol. <span data-fol="4r" class="fref">4r</span> in this manuscript references
March 17 as the feast day of Saint Gertrude *"in hac domo buscodis"*,
which tells us that the manuscript was produced in or for the Convent of
St. Gertrude in 's Hertogenbosch (the Netherlands). This convent,
which housed nuns primarily of noble birth, was famous for a miraculous
image of the Virgin.

The decoration of this manuscript is unique, as there are no other known
examples of the type of pen-flourished initials[^1] that are used within.
In fol. <span data-fol="86r" class="fref">86r</span> the illuminator has drawn the head of an animal and in fol. <span data-fol="137r" class="fref">137r</span> he has drawn a bird. Even though there are almost no annotations in
this manuscript, someone has added some staff-lines with musical notes
in the margin (see fol. <span data-fol="52v" class="fref">52v</span>, fol. <span data-fol="72v" class="fref">72v</span> and fol. <span data-fol="186r" class="fref">186r</span>).

[^1]: [Decorating the Book: Penwork Flourishing]({{ "/glossary/#penwork-flourishing" | relative_url }})

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 240 %}
{% cite kolbuscodis --locator nr.116 %}
{% cite kolkriezels --locator 157, nr.159 %}