---
layout: manuscript
route: liberal-arts-education

title: More than words
shelfmark: BPL 1715
origin: "Apennine Peninsula, Italy"
ms_date: "1458"
ms_creator: Festus
ms_title: Epitome
ms_title_en: Epitome
material: paper
pages: "93 fols."
dimensions: "235 x 159 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "27 lines"
questions:
- a6
- b6
---

This manuscript contains a summary of [Sextus Pompeius Festus'](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sextus_Pompeius_Festus) 
*De verborum significatione* (On the Meaning of Words). It was written by
the Benedictine monk and teacher [Paul the Deacon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_the_Deacon), who was the
first historian of Germany. Paul's literary achievements earned him a
position in [Charlemagne's](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charlemagne)
court. It was here that he wrote a summary of *De verborum significatione* for the famous emperor's library. Only one copy of
Festus' original version has survived. Unfortunately, this
eleventh-century manuscript is in very bad condition due to fire damage.
Paul the Deacon's summary is, therefore, the most important source for
the contents of Festus' work.

*De verborum significatione* is a lexicon with etymologies and
definitions of Latin words. When a copy of Paul the Deacon's version of
this lexicon was discovered by scholars in the early fifteenth century
it attracted renewed interest and study. In addition to insight into
Latin grammar, the manuscript also addresses Roman law, culture, history
and politics. The words are ordered alphabetically, and each letter is
introduced by a colored initial. This manuscript was copied by a scribe
named Christopher in 1458. In the sixteenth century it belonged to the
Convent of St. Barnabas in Brescia, Italy.

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 108 %}