---
layout: manuscript
route: liberal-arts-education
manifest: 
title: Advanced grammar
shelfmark: BPL 186
origin: "Apennine Peninsula, Italy? and France"
ms_date: "1100-1300"
ms_creator: Priscian
ms_title: Institutiones Grammaticae
ms_title_en: Institutes of Grammar
ms_title_extra: and other texts
material: parchment
pages: "96 fols."
dimensions: "187 x 125 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "c.25 lines"
questions:
- a6
- b7
---

Students of
[grammar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grammar) started
their education by studying
[Donatus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aelius_Donatus)' *Ars Minor*
early, sometimes as young as seven years old. Not only were students
expected to understand and use Latin grammar correctly, but also had to
study and memorize texts by classical authors. The study of grammar had
much in common with our contemporary literature studies. Advanced
students of grammar continued their education by studying Donatus' 
*Ars Maior* and
[Priscian's](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Priscian)
*Institutiones*.

This manuscript contains parts of both advanced grammar books. It starts
with book seven and eight of the *Institutiones* (fol. 1r - 86v) and
continues with six pages of the *Ars Maior* (fol. 87r - fol. 90v). Fol.
90v through fol. 96v. contain two other studies on grammar. The parts of
this manuscript were bound together on a later date, resulting in a
strong difference between the lay-outs of each part. The beginning of
this manuscript of the *Institutiones* contains glosses\* from the
fifteenth or sixteenth century, both in the margin and between the
lines. The same hand has added even more commentary on fol. 86v. Glosses
are not the only things written in the margin. Throughout the manuscript
you can find drawings, doodles and pen trials made by the reader(s). For
example, notice an alphabet and a couple of ducks or birds on fol. 47v
and a flower on fol. 12v.

**\* Using the Book: Gloss**

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 80 %}
{% cite gereuropa --locator 9-13 %}