---
layout: manuscript
route: religion-devotion

title: Personal favorites
shelfmark: BPL 2782
sort_as: BPL 2782
origin: "Holland, Netherlands"
ms_date: "1481"
ms_title: Getijdenboek met devotionele teksten
ms_title_en: Book of Hours with devotional texts
material: parchment
pages: "72 fols."
dimensions: "189 x 133 mm"
columns: "2 cols."
lines: "29 lines"
questions:
- a3
- b8
tags: [Book of Hours,Vernacular,Computus,Religion and Devotion]
---

This [book of hours](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_of_hours) is
quite unique, and is a great example of the personal touches that people
added to their devotional books.[^1] Johannes Philipszoon (1443-1509),
secretary of state of Leiden, was the first owner of this manuscript.
Usually hours were written in prose, but the hours in this book were
composed in rhyme. Every day of the week was described in seven verses
and provided spiritual meditations about different stages in the life of
Jesus such as his childhood, his entry into Jerusalem, his Crucifixion
and his Resurrection. The same poems occur in another manuscript owned
by Johannes Philipszoon from 1472-1481. After Johannes' death in 1509
the manuscript was given to his daughter, Margriete Claesdochter (see
fol. <span data-fol="1v" class="fref">1v</span>).

The manuscript is extensively decorated with pen-flourished initials,
painted borders and colored initials in red and blue. In the front of
the manuscript many of the blue initials are faded and smudgy, probably
because of water damage. Surprisingly, the red ink was not affected. The
manuscript begins with a calendar of saints. Just as in BPL 2706, this
manuscript has [computus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computus)
circles to determine the date of Easter. The starting date is 1481 (see
fol. <span data-fol="10v" class="fref">10v</span>).

[^1]: [Using the Book]({{ "/glossary/#using-the-book" | relative_url }})

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 228 %}
{% cite bridichten %}
{% cite bouboeken --locator 49,51,54-55 %}