---
layout: manuscript
handle: https://hdl.handle.net/1887.1/item:1669105
route: religion-devotion
manifest: "https://transcription.digitalscholarship.nl/iiif/5/manifest"
title: Something to talk about
shelfmark: BPL 2231
origin: "Netherlands"
ms_date: "1450-1500"
ms_creator: Dirc van Herxen
ms_title: Die materie van den sonden 
ms_title_en: On the topic of sins
material: parchment
pages: "146 fols."
dimensions: "250 x 177 mm"
columns: "2 cols."
lines: "40 lines"
questions:
- a7
- b4
---

Each Sunday and holy day the religious community of the [Brethren of the
Common Life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brethren_of_the_Common_Life)
held instructional conversations with pious laypeople about various
religious subjects. They used texts called *collatieboeken* when
searching for inspiration for these conversations or *collationes.* Dirc
van Herxen (1381-1457), one of the forefathers of the [Modern
Devotion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Devotio_Moderna) movement and a
famous scribe and illuminator, composed two *collatieboeken*. Van Herxen
wrote about subjects such as death, the last judgment, heaven, hell, sin
and confession. Material (inspiration) for his collatieboeken came from
the Bible, [patristic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patristics)
writings, and his own publications, and included a table of contents so
that the Brethren of the Common Life could easily look up the various
subjects (see fol. 3v).

The only collatieboeken of Dirc van Herxen that has survived fully
intact is held by the University Library of Utrecht (UB 3 L 6). This
manuscript from Leiden (BPL 2231) is comprised of the second half of the
first book of *collationes*, containing *Die Materie van den Sonden* (On
the Topic of Sins). It belonged to the Convent of the Virgin in
Gaesdonck (the Netherlands) in the fifteenth century (see fol. 3v, as
well as BPL 2482 and BPL 2483).

The manuscript has very few decorations and the parchment is damaged on
several leaves. Different methods to correct passages of the text[^1] have
been used, however, the readers did not leave many annotations
explaining their corrective choices.

[^1]: [Correcting the Text](/glossary/#)

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 120 %}
{% cite beeleken %}
{% cite desmiddelnederlandse --locator nr.90 %}