---
layout: manuscript
route: liberal-arts-education
manifest: https://transcription.digitalscholarship.nl/iiif/5/manifest
title: A medieval book order
shelfmark: BPL 138
origin: "France"
ms_date: "1437"
ms_title: Disticha Catonis
ms_title_en: The distichs of Cato
material: paper
pages: "167 fols."
dimensions: "219 x 150 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "various lines"
questions:
- a5
- b12
---

The beginning of this manuscript contains an interesting note (fol. 1v).
It describes an order of 800 printed books: 200 booklets with
penitential psalms, 200 copies of Cato and the "cleene gebeden" (brief
prayers), and 400 booklets of the most common prayers. The note was
probably scribbled down by the scribe of the manuscript Jean Brulelou
(see fol. 165r "Iste liber competit Johanni brulelou"). Brulelou
originally worked as a scribe in Tournai but changed professions in 1470
when he became a printer in Bruges. The person who ordered the books was
someone called "Gijs the Perkamentmaker" (Gijs the Parchmentmaker). This
note is a fine example of the changes that were brought about by the
development of the printing press.

The manuscript itself contains the *Disticha catonis,* a text with 144
didactic proverbs wrongly ascribed to the Roman historian [Cato the Elder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cato_the_Elder). 
[Julius Caesar Scaliger](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julius_Caesar_Scaliger)
(1484-1558) discovered that the actual author was the unknown Dionysius
Cato. The text was very popular way in medieval schools to introduce
students to the Trivium. Teachers also hoped that the proverbs would
serve as a moral compass for the students. The manuscript is decorated
with little drawings[^1] of leaves and the faces of kings, particularly
around the catchword.

[^1]: [Decorating the Book: Doodles]({{ "/glossary/#doodles" | relative_url }})

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 48 %}
{% cite boomanuscripts --locator 28,232 %}