---
layout: manuscript
handle: https://hdl.handle.net/1887.1/item:1670422
route: religion-devotion

title: Follow the rules
shelfmark: BPL 2483
sort_as: BPL 2483
origin: "Germany?"
ms_date: "1400-1500"
ms_title: Regula Benidicti 
ms_title_en: Rule of St. Benedict
material: paper
pages: "322 fols."
dimensions: "139 x 98 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "18 lines"
questions:
- a4
- b13
---

Whenever a person entered a monastery or convent, he or she made a vow
to obey to the rules of the order. Many convents followed the Rule of
St. Benedict. The *[Regula Benedicti](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_Saint_Benedict)* was
the most popular monastic rule in the Middle Ages. It emphasized the
importance of obedience, poverty and modesty. Moreover, it offered a
guide for day-to-day life in the monasteries. The Rule of St. Benedict
divided the day in periods of prayer, sleep, reading and labor. The part
of this manuscript that contains the Rule of St. Benedict was directed
at nuns, while other texts in this manuscript are directed at monks.
Different parts of the manuscript have their own lay-out, showing the
hands of different scribes. Like BPL 2231 and BPL 2482, this book
belonged to the Convent of the Virgin in Gaesdonck (the Netherlands).

The parchment used for the flyleaves of this manuscript was recycled
from an eighth century [psalter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Psalter).
Scribes often recycled a piece of parchment from an older manuscript in
order to reduce the total cost of production. Though it is a shame that
many manuscripts have not survived because their pages were re-used
elsewhere, sometimes the fragments are still readable and can be
studied. This manuscript still has its original binding; a [limp
binding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limp_binding) made from parchment
and without wooden cover boards.[^1] Unfortunately, the binding is badly
damaged by water, which is especially visible in the first few pages of
the manuscript.

[^1]: [Binding the Book: Limp Binding]({{ "/glossary/#limp-binding" | relative_url }})

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 134 %}
