---
layout: manuscript
route: liberal-arts-education
manifest: https://transcription.digitalscholarship.nl/iiif/5
title: Books in the Cradle
shelfmark: BPL 1765
origin: "Netherlands?"
ms_date: "1400-1450"
ms_title: Loquagium rhetoricae
ms_title_en: Rhetorical works
material: paper
pages: "9 fols."
dimensions: "278 x 203 mm"
columns: "2 cols."
lines: "c.65 lines"
questions:
- a4
- b4
---

Books printed before January 1st, 1501 are called
[*incunabula*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incunable). The word is
derived from the Latin and means "swaddling clothes" or "cradle" -
jokingly referring to the earliest stages of book printing, when the
practice was still in development. During those early stages, the
lay-out of printed books and manuscripts looked very similar. This is
visible in this book, which contains two printed texts and one
manuscript from the fifteenth century.

The printer left small blank spaces in the text so that an
[illuminator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illuminated_manuscript)
could add decorated initials, like what was common practice in the
production of manuscripts. Both printed parts of this book contain
pen-flourished initials in the script style of Haarlem (the
Netherlands). The illuminator has also added red marks next to the
headings of the first part (see for example fol. 3r), probably as a
reference to rubrics.\* Although the manuscript part of this book
contains empty spaces it is not decorated. This means that this part was
still separate from the two printed books when they texts were
illuminated. This book was owned by the priest Petrus Johan, from
Haarlem. We know this because each individual part contains his
elaborate signature and a note stating its ownership.

**\* Copying the Text: Reading Aids Rubric**

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 110 %}