---
layout: manuscript
route: liberal-arts-education
manifest: https://transcription.digitalscholarship.nl/iiif/5/manifest
title: Manners of our forefathers
shelfmark: BPL 1015
origin: "France?"
ms_date: "1300-1400"
ms_creator: Johannes van Garlandia
ms_title: Opus Synonymorum
ms_title_en: On Synonyms
material: parchment
pages: "14 fols."
dimensions: "134 x 98 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "c.22 lines"
questions:
- a3
- b7
tags: [Vernacular,Liberal Arts and Education]
---

The first thing you see when you open this fourteenth-century manuscript
are five paper leaves added to the beginning of the book during a
re-binding process. These pages contain copies of descriptions of the
manuscript from catalogues and other books from the nineteenth and
twentieth century. On fol. 1v we can, for example, read a quote from
Thomas Wright\'s *Opere angelico* (1857) saying that this volume
contains vocabularies that illustrate "the condition and manners of our
forefathers". These types of descriptions can be found in many
manuscripts, giving the modern reader insight into the way a manuscript
has been studied, valued and interpreted during the centuries after its
production.

There are only fourteen leaves in this manuscript of [John of Garlands's](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_of_Garland) *Synonyma.*
Garland (c. 1119-1270) wrote this book in the thirteenth century to
provide an aid for English
[grammar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grammar) students, who often
struggled to learn Latin due to its different grammar and syntax. The
*Synonyma* was written with advanced grammar students in mind, who used
it to look up synonyms for important words (see fol. 14v).

The manuscript is decorated with colored initials as well as two
pen-flourished initials.\* The annotations in the margin were added in
Minge (France) in the sixteenth century. It is possible that the
manuscript was also produced in France.

**\* Decorating the Book: Penwork Flourishing**

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 104 %}
