---
layout: manuscript
route: liberal-arts-education
manifest: https://transcription.digitalscholarship.nl/iiif/5
title: Medieval encyclopedia
shelfmark: BPL 197
origin: "Southern Netherlands?, Netherlands"
ms_date: "1100-1300"
ms_creator: Isidore of Seville
ms_title: Etymologiae
ms_title_en: The Etymologies
ms_title_extra: and other texts
material: parchment
pages: "74 fols."
dimensions: "172 x 125 mm"
columns: "1-2 cols."
lines: "35-43 lines"
questions:
- a6
- b6
---

In the beginning of the seventh century, the archbishop and scholar
[Isidore of Seville](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isidore_of_Seville)
(c. 560-636) wrote the
*[Etymologiae](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Etymologiae);* an
etymological encyclopedia based on hundreds of classical sources. In
addition to etymology, Isidore describes many more subjects in his
*book* such as: grammar, architecture, animals, law and religion. The
*Etymologiae* is considered to be the first Christian example of an
encyclopedia. This manuscript contains parts of book numbers four, ten,
twelve, sixteen, and seventeen of the twenty books that Isidore wrote in
total. The manuscript also contains the *Mineralia* by [Albert Magnus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albertus_Magnus), a treatise on
minerals and stones.

This manuscript consists of three independent parts that were bound
together on a later date. The first part was owned in the fifteenth
century by Johannes de Soumaing (see fol. 34v). On almost every leaf of
the second part (fol. 35r-68v) you can see drawings of little hands in
the margin that are pointing to sentences in the text. These hands,
called "manicula"\*, show the reader which passages deserve extra
attention. The shape of the hands varies, suggesting that they were
drawn by several readers. These readers also added other commentary in
the margins.

**\* Using the Book: Manicula**

{% cite gumillustrated --locator 94-96 %}
