---
layout: manuscript
route: religion-devotion
manifest: 
title: Secret language
shelfmark: LTK 247
origin: "Purmerend, Netherlands"
ms_date: "1463"
ms_creator: Johannes Scutken
ms_title: Vier evangeliën
ms_title_en: Four gospels
material: paper
pages: "135 fols."
dimensions: "195 x c.135 mm"
columns: "2 cols."
lines: "31-32 lines"
questions:
- a6
- b10
---

During the first half of seventeenth century this manuscript was in the
possession of Dirck Willemszoon van Emden and Neeltgen Michielsdochter,
both from Amsterdam. We know this because Dirck identified himself and
his spouse as owners of the book on the first flyleaves at the end of
the manuscript. He requested that anyone who found it return it to them.
While notes like these are encountered from time to time in medieval
manuscripts, this particular one was written in a secret language
comprised of symbols. Luckily, Dirck also provided future readers with a
key to translate his message. Why he thought it was necessary to use a
secret language is unknown.

This manuscript contains the [four
Gospels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gospel), in the Dutch translation
by Johan Scutken. His translation was one of the most widespread texts
of the Middle Ages (see also LTK 2706). On the last page of the
manuscript, the scribe has added a
[colophon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colophon_(publishing))\* in
which he writes that he, "*Cop Wit* *Moens*" ("Moens, with a white
head"), has written this manuscript in Purmerend (Netherlands) in 1463.
He also asks the reader to pray for him. In addition to the colored
initials and rubrics, this manuscript is decorated with four miniatures
of the evangelists.

**\* Copying the Text: Scribal Colophon**

{% cite liecodices --locator 64 %}
{% cite biemiddelnederlandse %}
{% cite hulprosper %}