---
layout: manuscript
route: religion-devotion
manifest: https://transcription.digitalscholarship.nl/iiif/5
title: Written and printed
shelfmark: LTK 237
origin: "Netherlands"
ms_date: "1400-1550"
ms_title: Gebeden en Meditatiën
ms_title_en: Prayer book
material: paper and parchment
pages: "189 fols."
dimensions: "138 x 95 mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "various lines"
questions:
- a5
- b1
---

In the Middle Ages and the Early Modern Period, it was a common practice
to bind several manuscripts together. Such books are called "composite
manuscripts", as opposed to manuscripts that consist of a single unit
with multiple texts, which is sometimes called a miscellany. LTK 237
book is a collection of various texts that were bound together at a
later stage. Curiously, it not only contains two manuscripts but also
four [printed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Printing_press) texts. The
devotional collection created by the binder contains prayers to the
Virgin, [Pater Nosters](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lord%27s_Prayer),
spiritual exercises about the Passion of Christ, and other types of
devotional education.

Even though parts 2, 3, 5, and 6 are printed texts, their lay-out,
script, and decorations look similar to that of a manuscript. The
printers included decorated initials by either printing them (see fols.
70r, 84r, and 159r) or leaving a blank space for the illuminator or
reader to fill in (see for example fol. 167r). The person who drew the
initial on fol. 167r probably also colored the letters of the other
printed texts and contributed to the illustrations of part two and
three. The first leaf of the fourth part, which consists of fols.
93-158, is heavily stained and shows that this text has circulated
independently from the other parts for quite a while, probably without a
(proper) cover.

{% cite liecodices --locator 50-54 %}
{% cite sherepertorium --locator 28-29 %}