---
layout: manuscript
route: religion-devotion
manifest: "https://lab.library.universiteitleiden.nl/transcription/iiif/110/manifest"
title: Three in One
shelfmark: LTK 218
origin: "Netherlands, Holland"
ms_date: "1450-1500"
ms_title: Liedboek
ms_title_en: Book of Songs and other texts
material: paper
pages: "78 fols."
dimensions: "190 x c.140mm"
columns: "1 col."
lines: "various lines"
questions:
- |
  Name three differences between each part of this manuscript. Look
  for example at the type of script, the decorations and the addition
  of reading aids.

- |
  How do the three parts of this manuscript relate to each other?
  Argue which kind of institution or owner could have been responsible
  for binding these parts together.

- |
  Try to deduce as many details about Marigen Remen's life by
  studying the third part of this manuscript.
---

This manuscript consists of three independent codicological parts. The
parts were produced at different times and places and were bound
together at a later stage. When the three parts were bound together, the
leaves were cut to the same size. In the third part this has led to some
loss of the text. Yet if you look closely you can see that someone has
added the missing letters on a later date (see for example f.66v).

The first part of this manuscript (f.1r-f.53v) contains various prayers
and a [psalter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Psalter).
This part once belonged to a Dominican monastery in Zwolle. The second
part consists of two sermons for the feast day of St. Barbara. The most
interesting part of this manuscript is, however, the third part. This
part contains a [book of
songs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hymnal) owned ánd
written by Marigen Remen, a tertiaris from Leiden or Amsterdam (see
f.65v). Even though her script is rough and her grammar poor, the text
is easily readable. The red dots on each page are not to be mistaken for
musical notes. They are added as decoration to fill up the interline
spacing. This book of songs is one of the youngest collection of songs
for personal use that has been transmitted. Most books of songs that
were produced in the second half of the sixteenth century were no longer
written but printed.

{% cite codicesv stooker marigen -l 26-30 %}