---
layout: manuscript
route: religion-devotion

title: Memento mori
shelfmark: LTK 318
origin: "Gouda, Netherlands"
ms_date: "1476"
ms_title: Sermoenen
ms_title_en: Sermons
material: paper
pages: "275 fols."
dimensions: "c.285 x 205 mm"
columns: "2 cols."
lines: "34-37 lines"
questions:
- a3
- b7
---

Fol. <span data-fol="173v" class="fref">173v</span> of this manuscripts contains the inscription "This book was
written for Claes van Dorssen and his wife Yde". When Claes died, in
1477, his wife Yde donated the manuscript to the Convent of
[Mariënsterre](https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regulierenklooster_(Gouda))
in Gouda (Netherlands), with the stipulation that is should never leave
the convent for more than three days, not even after her death. The
manuscript contains sermons, a text about the life and suffering of
Christ and a poem about death. The graveyard of the convent exhibited an
open grave which was visited daily, and the entrance of the church
contained a coffin that one had to pass each time one entered, leading
us to believe that Death was an important subject for this convent. We
learn from the first flyleaf at the end of this manuscript that Yde's
wish was not honored, was it contains a note saying that in the 16^th^
century the manuscript belonged to one Arnoldus Vianen. By then the
Convent of Mariënsterre had been abolished, explaining the transfer of
ownership.

In the first part of this manuscript someone used a pencil to trace the
[watermarks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Watermark)[^1] on the paper
(see fols. <span data-fol="7v" class="fref">7v</span>, <span data-fol="35v" class="fref">35v</span>, and <span data-fol="66v" class="fref">66v</span>). Watermarks were produced by attaching an
emblem made of brass-wire to the screen of a paper mold. In order to
make it possible to identify the maker or place of origin, each
papermaker used a signature watermark design, much like a logo. This
manuscript contains a few rubrics and simple colored initials, but
otherwise has very little decoration.

[^1]: [Choosing a Writing Support: Watermark]({{ "/glossary/#watermark" | relative_url }})

{% cite liecodices --locator 144-145 %}
{% cite lemvijfhonderste --locator nr.19 %}
