---
layout: manuscript
route: books-for-professional-use

title: Religious manual or status symbol?
shelfmark: LTK 287
sort_as: LTK 0287
origin: "Delft, Netherlands"
ms_date: "c.1460"
ms_title: Lekenbrevier
ms_title_en: Lay breviary
material: parchment
pages: "333 fols."
dimensions: "175 x 125 mm"
columns: "2 cols."
lines: "27 lines"
questions:
- a5
- b12
---

Members of the clergy were not the only people in the Middle Ages who
wanted to live a pious and religious life. The fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries saw a rise in the demand for devotional books aimed at lay
people. [Books of Hours](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_of_hours),
containing the daily prayers according to the canonical hours in the
day, were the most popular devotional books during this time. Another
type of a religious manual was the
[*Breviarium*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Breviary). These books,
commonly used by members of the clergy, contained not only the liturgy
of hours but also a choir psalter, litanies, and prayers for specific
holy days. In the Late Middle Ages increasingly more members of the
nobility wanted to own a breviary. Since a breviary was bigger and more
elaborate than a Book of Hours it was possible to add more miniatures[^1].
Miniatures and other beautiful decorations made these books a symbol of
high social status in addition to their function as a devotional manual.

This lay breviary does not contain any miniatures but is decorated with
many pen-flourished initials. From the style of these decorations it can
be concluded that the manuscript was produced in the Convent of St.
Ursula in Delft (the Netherlands). It also contains tables for the
practice of [bloodletting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloodletting).
Tables with this type of knowledge were often added in devotional
manuscripts, since many people at the time believed that bloodletting
inspired spiritual asceticism and could cure various ailments.

[^1]: [Miniatures]({{ "/glossary/#miniatures" | relative_url }})

{% cite liecodices --locator 101-102 %}
{% cite biemiddelnederlandse %}
{% cite pacilluminated --locator nr. 224 %}
{% cite gumillustrated %}