---
layout: manuscript
route: religion-devotion
manifest: https://transcription.digitalscholarship.nl/iiif/5/manifest
title: Saints and legends
shelfmark: LTK 278
origin: "Leiden?, Netherlands"
ms_date: "1420"
ms_creator: Jacobus de Voragine
ms_title: Legenda Aurea
ms_title_en: The Golden Legend
material: paper
pages: "152 fols."
dimensions: "289 x 210 mm"
columns: "2 cols."
lines: "36-39 lines"
questions:
- a6
- b10
---

In the thirteenth century, the Italian writer and archbishop [Jacobus de
Voragine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacobus_da_Varagine) (1228-1298)
compiled the *[Legenda Aurea](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_Legend)* (The Golden
Legend); a collection of the lives of saints ordered according to the
ecclesiastical year (see also LTK 263). The *Legenda Aurea* was based on
a variety of Latin sources. Though it was meant as a reference work for
[Dominican](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dominican_Order) friars it was
also very popular with lay people. The book lost its popularity in the
sixteenth century due to criticism by the followers of the
Counter-Reformation, who believed that it contained too many legends of
questionable truth.

This copy contains the oldest Dutch *Legenda Aurea* translation. The
manuscript does not contain the whole text but only the text that
corresponds with the months July through November, considered the
"summer part". The manuscript was written in 1420, probably by Willem
van der Does from Leiden for his own personal use[^1] (see. fol. 1v.). The
script is written in small cursive script, making it unsuitable to read
in a monastery refectory. Also, there are too few decorations for it to
have been considered for display in a church. The manuscript contains
one pen-flourished initial and several colored initials.

[^1]: [Using the Book]({{ "/glossary/#" | relative_url }})

{% cite liecodices --locator 91 %}
{% cite meumiddelnederlandse --locator nr.33 %}
{% cite obbmiddeleeuwen %}
